data/blog/2025/2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring.md, before:

---
id: 2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring
author: bidi
title: 'Laminas MVC Is Retiring'
draft: false
public: true
created: '2025-06-06T11:00:00-01:00'
updated: '2025-06-06T11:00:00-01:00'
tags:
  - MVC
  - middleware
  - framework
  - software architecture
  - software lifecycle
openGraphImage: '2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring.png'
openGraphDescription: 'Laminas MVC Is Retiring'
---

The Laminas MVC (Model-View-Controller) framework has proven itself over the years as a viable solution for enterprise applications.
Given its versatility, it was seen as a good starting point by many professional PHP developers.
Still, a number of reasons have determined the members of the Laminas Technical Steering Committee (TSC) to discontinue Laminas MVC.

<!--- EXTENDED -->

In the first stage, which lasts until PHP 8.5 is released (estimated at November 2025), MVC will be marked as `security-only` (fixing security vulnerabilities) and after that it will be `archived` (no longer supported).
In this article we will explore the reasoning behind the decision taken by the Laminas TCS members.

### Why discontinue Laminas MVC?

The **main reason** why MVC is set to be discontinued is that there is simply **no time and resources** to maintain it.
This is reinforced by the **little activity on Laminas MVC** in the past few months - by users, contributors and maintainers.
Many TSC members are seeing Laminas MVC as a legacy code that is more difficult to work with.
Some have expressed a lack of desire to return to Laminas MVC after using **Mezzio** middleware.

TSC members have shifted their focus to [Mezzio](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio) which is the better alternative, a worthy successor to MVC and the **second reason** for their decision regarding MVC.
Having the **Mezzio alternative** ready to use makes letting go of MVC a lot easier.
Mezzio and its dependencies are already a handful to maintain, but this framework has become the de facto solution for new projects of late.

### The steps leading to the discontinuation on MVC

A major decision like discontinuing a central product cannot be taken lightly.
The TSC members agree that Laminas MVC **cannot be archived** just yet, because it is **still in use** by many active applications.
Instead it's going to be put in `security-only` mode until PHP 8.5 is released, to allow developers of legacy applications to update their code by the time MVC is fully abandoned and archived.
The shift of focus toward **middleware**, PSR-7, PSR-15 and PSR-17 will be **actively publicized** as a collective effort by TSC members moving forward.

### The middleware alternative

As we have already mentioned, **Mezzio** is the recommended alternative to replace MVC.

- Mezzio implements **PSRs** defined by the PHP Framework Interop Group to promote code consistency that leads to better code readability and maintainability:
    - [PSR-7: HTTP message interfaces](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/).
    - [PSR-15: HTTP Server Request Handlers](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-15/).
- Mezzio supports several **[PSR-11 Container](https://github.com/php-fig/container)** implementations:
    - laminas-servicemanager.
    - Symfony DI Container.
    - PHP-DI.
    - chubbyphp-container.
- There is a long list of **Laminas packages** that can be easily integrated into your project.
They also implement PSRs.
You decide what you want components to include in your application.
- The **Mezzio microframework** has a minimalist structure with 5 core components, which makes it easier to work with than MVC:
    - DI container.
    - Router.
    - Error handler for the development environment.
    - Template engine.
    - Handlers (based on PSR-7 and PSR-15 interfaces).
- Mezzio can be used to **build any type of application**, whether it be an API or an HTML-based frontend.

Basically, anything you can do with Laminas MVC can be done easier and better with Mezzio.

### How to migrate from Laminas MVC to Mezzio

A laminas-mvc based application can be prepared to make the migration to Mezzio easier.
The middleware and request handlers can already be used in the existing laminas-mvc application, which can then be adapted.
The best course of action is to **consult a TSC member** for advice on moving forward.
Alternatively, you can contact a commercial vendor to analyze your application and figure out a customized solution.

### Additional resources

- [Mezzio](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio)
- [What Is Mezzio? Why Would I Use It?](https://www.zend.com/resources/what-mezzio-why-would-i-use-it)
- [Laminas ServiceManager 4](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-servicemanager)
- [PSR-11: Container interface](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-11/)
- [PSR-11: Container interface - version 2 on GitHub](https://github.com/php-fig/container)
- [PSR-7: HTTP message interfaces](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/)
- [PSR-15: HTTP Server Request Handlers](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-15/)
- [TSC Minutes 2025-05-05](https://github.com/laminas/technical-steering-committee/blob/main/meetings/minutes/2025-05-05-TSC-Minutes.md)

Commit message:

updated migration section
Signed-off-by: Florin Bidirean <bidi@dotkernel.com>

data/blog/2025/2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring.md, after:

---
id: 2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring
author: bidi
title: 'Laminas MVC Is Retiring'
draft: false
public: true
created: '2025-06-06T11:00:00-01:00'
updated: '2025-06-06T11:00:00-01:00'
tags:
  - MVC
  - middleware
  - framework
  - software architecture
  - software lifecycle
openGraphImage: '2025-06-06-laminas-mvc-is-retiring.png'
openGraphDescription: 'Laminas MVC Is Retiring'
---

The Laminas MVC (Model-View-Controller) framework has proven itself over the years as a viable solution for enterprise applications.
Given its versatility, it was seen as a good starting point by many professional PHP developers.
Still, a number of reasons have determined the members of the Laminas Technical Steering Committee (TSC) to discontinue Laminas MVC.

<!--- EXTENDED -->

In the first stage, which lasts until PHP 8.5 is released (estimated at November 2025), MVC will be marked as `security-only` (fixing security vulnerabilities) and after that it will be `archived` (no longer supported).
In this article we will explore the reasoning behind the decision taken by the Laminas TCS members.

### Why discontinue Laminas MVC?

The **main reason** why MVC is set to be discontinued is that there is simply **no time and resources** to maintain it.
This is reinforced by the **little activity on Laminas MVC** in the past few months - by users, contributors and maintainers.
Many TSC members are seeing Laminas MVC as a legacy code that is more difficult to work with.
Some have expressed a lack of desire to return to Laminas MVC after using **Mezzio** middleware.

TSC members have shifted their focus to [Mezzio](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio) which is the better alternative, a worthy successor to MVC and the **second reason** for their decision regarding MVC.
Having the **Mezzio alternative** ready to use makes letting go of MVC a lot easier.
Mezzio and its dependencies are already a handful to maintain, but this framework has become the de facto solution for new projects of late.

### The steps leading to the discontinuation on MVC

A major decision like discontinuing a central product cannot be taken lightly.
The TSC members agree that Laminas MVC **cannot be archived** just yet, because it is **still in use** by many active applications.
Instead it's going to be put in `security-only` mode until PHP 8.5 is released, to allow developers of legacy applications to update their code by the time MVC is fully abandoned and archived.
The shift of focus toward **middleware**, PSR-7, PSR-15 and PSR-17 will be **actively publicized** as a collective effort by TSC members moving forward.

### The middleware alternative

As we have already mentioned, **Mezzio** is the recommended alternative to replace MVC.

- Mezzio implements **PSRs** defined by the PHP Framework Interop Group to promote code consistency that leads to better code readability and maintainability:
    - [PSR-7: HTTP message interfaces](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/).
    - [PSR-15: HTTP Server Request Handlers](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-15/).
- Mezzio supports several **[PSR-11 Container](https://github.com/php-fig/container)** implementations:
    - laminas-servicemanager.
    - Symfony DI Container.
    - PHP-DI.
    - chubbyphp-container.
- There is a long list of **Laminas packages** that can be easily integrated into your project.
They also implement PSRs.
You decide what you want components to include in your application.
- The **Mezzio microframework** has a minimalist structure with 5 core components, which makes it easier to work with than MVC:
    - DI container.
    - Router.
    - Error handler for the development environment.
    - Template engine.
    - Handlers (based on PSR-7 and PSR-15 interfaces).
- Mezzio can be used to **build any type of application**, whether it be an API or an HTML-based frontend.

Basically, anything you can do with Laminas MVC can be done easier and better with Mezzio.

### How to migrate from Laminas MVC to Mezzio

A laminas-mvc based application can be prepared to make the migration to Mezzio easier.
The middleware and request handlers can already be used in the existing laminas-mvc application, which can then be adapted.
The second step in the migration concerns the aging dependencies in legacy projects, some of which may already be discontinued, so their functionality needs to be replaced.

The best course of action is to open a topic of discussion on the [Laminas discourse forum](https://discourse.laminas.dev/) or [Laminas github discussions](https://github.com/orgs/laminas/discussions).
More often than not your application needs to be analyzed to figure out a customized solution.

### Additional resources

- [Mezzio](https://github.com/mezzio/mezzio)
- [What Is Mezzio? Why Would I Use It?](https://www.zend.com/resources/what-mezzio-why-would-i-use-it)
- [Laminas ServiceManager 4](https://github.com/laminas/laminas-servicemanager)
- [PSR-11: Container interface](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-11/)
- [PSR-11: Container interface - version 2 on GitHub](https://github.com/php-fig/container)
- [PSR-7: HTTP message interfaces](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-7/)
- [PSR-15: HTTP Server Request Handlers](https://www.php-fig.org/psr/psr-15/)
- [TSC Minutes 2025-05-05](https://github.com/laminas/technical-steering-committee/blob/main/meetings/minutes/2025-05-05-TSC-Minutes.md)
